Amen, and please be seated.
Now, if you have a Bible, let me invite you to turn with me to Ephesians chapter two, verses eight through 10.
We continue our study through this book together, and this morning we consider the role of God's grace and our faith and good works in the Christian life.
Let me invite you to give attention to this very familiar passage, maybe special attention because so.
From Ephesians 2, verses eight through 10, this is the word of God.
For by grace you have been saved through faith.
And this is not your own doing, it is the gift of God.
Not a result of works so that no one can boast.
For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand that we should walk in them.
This is the Lord of the Lord.
Let's look to Him in prayer.
Our Father, we ask that You would give us life and health by this Word and by the work of the Holy Spirit to the
glory of your name through Jesus Christ, we pray.
Amen.
The Apostle Paul is in this section where he's teaching Christians about our salvation so that we'll better understand and marvel at what God has done for us.
What did God do for us?
Let's review for just a moment.
verses one to three, God found us spiritually dead in our trespasses and sins and disobedient and enslaved to our lusts and our passions.
And we were by nature children of wrath, but God made us, Paul says verse four, but God made us spiritually alive.
He redeemed us from our enslavement to sin and the penalty of it, and he rescued us from
the wrath of God due to us, and he brought us to himself.
He united us to Jesus.
So that's what is said of Jesus can actually be said of us.
In the end of chapter one, it says of Jesus that God raised him from the dead.
And he ascended into heaven and it is seated at the right hand of God the Father almighty above all of their authority and all other names.
And in chapter two, the apostle says,
of us, of all who trust in Christ.
And he does it because Christ is the head and we're the body and where the head goes, the body goes.
He says, we likewise are raised and ascended and seated in the heavenly in Christ Jesus with Christ Jesus.
It's hard to get your head wrapped around the implications of all of that, but you just know that he's asserting it as the truth.
It is so as
A bride is united to her bridegroom as a building is united to its foundational cornerstone as a body is united to its heads.
So Christians are united in everything with Christ.
And why did God do this?
Why did God do this versus four to seven?
We looked at this last time because he is rich in mercy.
and because of the great love with which he loved us.
And because of the immeasurable grace he has toward us and because of his kindness in Christ Jesus.
So that verse seven in the coming ages, God will show or put on display.
He will demonstrate to the universe publicly the immeasurable riches of his grace and kindness to us.
And so the message of verses one to seven is we didn't save ourselves.
We couldn't save ourselves being dead in our trespasses and sins, but God saved us.
And He saved us by His grace.
Now this raises questions then about, well, okay, but what about faith?
And what about works, even good works.
And if God
sovereignly and graciously without our contribution saves us, then what about these things?
I mean, are we saved without faith?
Can we be?
Are we saved without good works?
I mean, do these things even matter in the Christian life?
These are the kinds of questions that leave to mind when you say that salvation is of the Lord.
And by grace is a gift.
So here,
In verses eight through 10, the Apostle Paul addresses these issues and let me highlight four lessons from the passage for us.
I'll give them to you as we go.
The first is this, God saves us and he saves us by his grace.
Now, you're saying to me, I think you just said that already Ted, by way of introduction.
And yes, because the Apostle Paul made just that point in verse five, he said, by grace, you have been saved.
And now he repeats himself, verse eight, for by grace, you have been saved.
You see that?
Good teachers repeat themselves.
Well, one reason being they know their students and their disciples need this kind of repetition.
We know ourselves, we know our disciples, we know we're all prone to forget.
We're all prone to downplay, saving grace in this case,
And prone, we're tempted to pat ourselves on our back for our salvation.
And the Apostle wants all the glory to go to God.
It is justly do Him.
He wants us to boast, not in ourselves, but to boast in the Lord.
And so he emphasizes, God saves us.
He saves us by His grace.
What is this grace?
Well, grace isn't a substance that God kind of doles out.
Grace is a relational category.
It's a disposition of unmerited favor in the face of our demerits.
That is, it's God's favor to you when you don't deserve it and when in fact you deserve the opposite, his disfavor.
So it's God giving you pardon for sin and spiritual life and a heavenly inheritance.
when what you truly deserve is his condemnation and eternal death and hell.
And the Apostle Paul, who's telling us this, knew a thing or two about God's grace.
You remember his story.
He was born a Jew of the tribe of Benjamin.
He belonged to the sect of the Pharisees who were the conservative Bible teachers and moral reformers of their day.
He was zealous for the law of God
And he was certain he was right to oppose Jesus and to oppose Christians and to oppose the Christian church, believing as he did that Jesus was a false prophet and people were being led astray.
And so what did he do?
He sought to arrest and imprison Christians.
He stood in the crowd of those who surrounded Stephen, stoning him to death
Well, they laid their cloaks at his feet so their cloaks wouldn't get stolen.
He approved as they threw rocks at Stephen and killed him.
He ravaged the church, the Book of Acts says, he says of himself entering house after house and dragging off men and women and committing them to prison.
He says in Acts 26 verse nine, I myself was convinced that I ought to do many things.
in opposing the name of Jesus of Nazareth, and I did so in Jerusalem.
I not only locked up many of the saints in prison after receiving authority from the chief priests, but when they were put to death, I cast my vote against them, and I punished them often in all the synagogues, and I tried to make them blaspheme, and in raging fury against them, I persecuted them even to foreign
cities.
And so it was that as he was on his way from Jerusalem to Damascus, some 140 miles or so as the crow flies a day of many, during many days, hunting Christians, that suddenly a light from heaven shone around him.
And following to the ground, he heard a voice saying, Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?
And he said, who are you, Lord?
And he said, I am Jesus whom you are persecuting.
What did Jesus do with a man who was killing his people?
He intervened.
He stopped him in his tracks and he revealed to him the truth and he had mercy on his soul and he forgave a self-righteous
persecutor of Christians, and he made him alive in Christ.
Paul could sing, if the word's been written, amazing grace.
How sweet the sound that saved a wretch like me.
I once was lost, but now I'm found was blind.
But now I see.
That's what God's grace does.
It finds the lost.
It heals the blind.
It pardons the wicked.
It gives life
to the spiritually dead.
And that's what God did for you, dear Christian.
His grace set Jesus to do for you what you couldn't do for yourself.
So Jesus fulfilled the righteous requirements of the law in his perfect life of love and obedience for you.
And Jesus satisfied the just penalties of God's broken laws and he died the death on the cross that we deserve, bearing the wrath of God to divert it away
away from you and he did more.
He rose from the grave and triumph or the evil one and all evil and he brings you with him in his triumph.
God did this for you and God applied this to you, uniting you to Christ.
That's what the Apostle Paul says.
The second lesson is God saves us by God's grace through faith.
You see that language in verse eight, for by grace you have been saved through faith.
Now some of you are glad that I have finally mentioned faith in four sermons on Ephesians two, one to 10.
After all, we've got to believe in Jesus, don't we?
Well, yes indeed we do, and we are called to trust in Him.
We're called to put our faith in Him.
We cannot be saved.
apart from being united to Christ and the bond of our union with Christ is twofold.
The bond of our union with Christ, what binds us to Christ is on the one hand, God the Holy Spirit, who comes wherever he pleases, like the wind that blows wherever it pleases and he comes and he brings life and he gives a new heart and he awakens and he gives us eyes to see the kingdom and the king and
And with that new heart, that new heart is a heart that is no longer cold-hearted, hard-hearted, in such a way that it refuses to believe, but it's a heart that believes, a heart that trusts in Jesus.
But notice here how comparatively little the apostle says about faith in Jesus.
It's just a passing comment, really, a quick phrase.
You've been saved by grace through faith, and this is not of yourselves, he goes on to say in the very next breath, it's the gift of God.
Paul doesn't have much here to say about faith, not because faith isn't important, but because this passage isn't calling us to faith.
This passage is actually explaining to us why it is we have faith.
God gave His Son for you.
God gave you spiritual life.
God saved you and God graced you.
This is so life-giving to see because it's a temptation for all of us as Christians to misplace our confidence by putting our confidence in our faith instead of putting our confidence in Christ who saves.
When haven't you done this?
I do this again and again, I'm always tempted to do this.
Maybe this is your situation.
You look back and you remember the time when you think you first believed.
Now, some of us don't remember that time.
You don't have to remember that time.
What matters is ultimately not when did you first believe, but do you believe in Jesus now?
But some of us look back at that time and we ask ourselves questions like, back then, did I believe enough?
Was I sincere enough?
Did I get my faith right?
And it can really shake your assurance that God has indeed saved you, been merciful to you and loved you, because you see so much weakness in yourself and in your faith.
But these are not the questions we're being invited to ask, as if our assurance of being saved is bound in what we did for Jesus.
rather than what he did for us.
And the friend who illustrates it this way, if a sick patient gets tuberculosis and the doctor gives them a prescription for penicillin, what will happen if they take it?
They'll die of tuberculosis.
Why?
Because penicillin isn't the antibiotic that treats tuberculosis.
Streptomycin is, and since
those days, other kinds of things I can't even pronounce.
But the point is this.
Faith is only as good as its object.
The act of taking something like medicine is like faith.
You can't take the wrong thing or trust in the wrong thing and get what you need.
Faith isn't the medicine.
Christ is the medicine.
The important thing is to look to Christ and away from yourself.
What a relief that is.
Even weak faith in Christ is saving faith.
The sureness of salvation is in the person and work of Christ, not the strength of our faith in Him.
What a weak faith lays hold of an infinitely strong and loving Savior.
We are assured of everlasting life.
Bishop J.C. Ryle put it this way.
There are some in every congregation that hear the gospel who are ready to despair of their own salvation because their strength seems so small.
They are full of fears and despondency because their knowledge and faith and hope and love appears so dwarfish and diminutive.
Let them know that wheat faith gives a person as real and true a saving interest in Christ
as strong faith, though it may not give them the same joy.
There is life in an infant as truly as in a grown man.
There is fire in a spark as truly as in a flaming or a burning flame.
The least degree of God's grace is an everlasting possession.
It comes down from heaven.
It is precious
in our Lord's eyes and it shall never be overthrown."
So Paul speaks of faith.
What is Christian faith then?
It is receiving and resting upon Christ alone for your salvation.
It's not like skiing up a mountainside from bottom to top in snow.
That would be a difficult chore.
That would be quite a lot of work.
And I suppose we would rightly applaud you if you could even accomplish such a thing.
But the rest of us are going to sit down on a chairlift that takes us from the bottom to the top.
Faith is sitting down on the only thing that can get you from the bottom to the top, so to speak.
The only thing that can get you out of hell and into heaven.
The only thing that can get you for God and God for you.
It's receiving and resting on the only adequate means.
It's receiving and resting on Jesus Christ alone for your salvation.
And so your salvation is not something you have attained by doing.
It is something you have received by believing.
So we sing with Augustus' top lady, not the labors of my hands could fulfill thy laws demands.
Could my zeal no respite know?
Could my tears forever flow?
Could my tears of repentance forever flow?
All for sin could not atone.
Thou must save and thou alone.
Nothing in my hand I bring.
simply to thy cross-eye cling.
Naked come to thee for dress, helpless, look to thee for grace, foul, eye to the fountainfly.
Wash me, Savior, or I die."
Well, here's the third lesson.
God saves us by His grace through faith in Christ as a gift.
We notice that language again, verse 8, for by grace you've been saved through faith.
This not your own doing.
It is the gift of God, not a result of work so that no one can boast.
Salvation is not a work we accomplish.
It is a gift we receive.
Faith is not our contribution to some hypothetically insufficient work.
The work of Christ is not insufficient.
And to mix up faith with works or to mix up faith and works or to call faith a work is to undercut our assurance of salvation.
If we're ever going to be fully confident of anything, we've got to be confident that everything necessary is done.
Not by us, but by him.
And if we think we've contributed just a little bit to our own salvation,
Could our salvation ever be sure and certain?
I mean, aren't you just a little suspicious of yourself?
Don't you find that you have a finical?
Yeah, that's the right word.
Finical, unfaithful, I believe, oh, help my unbelief, kind of heart.
But you know, John, the apostle says in 1 John 4 18, perfect love casts out fear.
And I didn't understand this for a long time.
I thought he was saying that if I had perfect love for Jesus, it would cast out my fears that I wasn't saved or wouldn't fully finally be saved, that I could lose my salvation.
That's not what he's saying at all.
It's the perfect love of God for us that drives out
our fears because it's his gift.
I can have assurance and because it's his gift, I can, I can begin to truly praise him and thank him without in the back of my mind, kneeling before him and imagining in any way, shape or form that I contributed to my salvation and therefore saying, thank you, Lord, that I have me to thank.
That's absurd.
And no Christian does that, of course.
We're saying in our prayer life, even if we get up from prayer and start talking nonsense.
So then faith isn't a good work I do to substitute for the fact that I don't have good works.
This is a false gospel that has been propagated historically.
It's the view that what God requires of humanity is perfect obedience.
But he knows of course that we haven't given it.
So he's lowered the bar of salvation.
And now what he requires instead of perfect loving obedience is faith.
And faith there is viewed as the substitute God receives and welcomes instead of perfect obedience.
That's not what faith is.
Faith is looking away from my works and resting on the finished work of Christ.
Now I know that some of you know that there's been a long debate in Christian theology and scripture interpretation about this passage.
When the Apostle Paul says, and this, not your own doing, it's the gift of God, the question is raised in the scholarly literature.
What is the this that he's referring to?
And I just want to comment on it briefly.
Many have said that the this,
refers to the nearest noun in the sentence, the closest one, and that's faith.
And so he's saying, see, faith is a gift.
Others have said, no, no, because, now listen, if you don't like grammar, just tune out for a second and come back later.
But in Greek, there are masculine and feminine and neuter nouns.
And the issue here is that this, the this is neuter, and all the nouns are feminine,
And normally the this would be the same gender as the noun it's referring to.
So they'll say the this, which is neuter, refers not to any one specific noun in the phrase, but to the whole of the phrase taken together.
The notion of salvation is by grace through faith as a gift.
This is the gift of God.
Well, it certainly is the gift of God.
And as the rest of the Bible makes clear,
faith being part of that is also itself the gift of God.
I mean, if you'll just scan your eyes over at Ephesians 6 verse 23 for a moment, Paul in giving his benediction says, peace be to the brothers or brothers and sisters and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
He's praying that they would have peace, love, and faith, and where would they get it?
They get it from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ because it's His gift.
Or consider in Acts chapter 18 the story of Apollos, the Jewish man who was an eloquent teacher.
He'd been instructed in the scriptures.
He actually believed in Jesus, but he was a little deficient in certain things and along came Priscilla and Aquila.
and they instructed him more sufficiently such that he was able eventually to become a help to other believers.
And it says of him in Acts 18 verse 27, having now been instructed properly, he greatly helped those who through grace believed.
It was through grace, God's unmerited favor in the face of their demerits, that they believed.
because it's a gift.
This was Lydia's experience in Acts chapter 16 verse 14.
Lydia, that dear godly woman from Thyatira, a seller of purple goods.
She was a God worshipper and she was down by the river, worshipping God among others.
And yet she hadn't heard of Jesus yet and the Apostle Paul went down there looking for people to preach to.
And it says, the Lord opened her heart
to pay attention to what was said by Paul.
Her heart was closed until the Lord opened it and she paid attention and then she bore the fruit of genuine faith.
She invited them home, fathom and all sorts of things, showed them hospitality.
So that we can say this, the sign on the outside of the door of salvation says what?
It says what Jesus says, there are different ways to put it,
Come to me, all you who are weary and heavy laden, then I will give you rest for your souls.
Come to me.
And you walk through that door coming to Jesus and the door closes behind you, it closes securely, it encloses you in safely.
And you're in Jesus and you're saved.
And you look back at the door and the sign of the door from the backside says, I am the good shepherd.
And I know my own and my own know me, and I give them eternal life.
You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit."
Why does God save us by grace through faith as a gift and not as a result of works?
Notice, end of verse 9, so that no one can boast.
All boasting in heaven is boasting about the Lamb of God who was slain.
for His people's salvation.
All our boasting on earth should match the boasting of heaven.
You can't earn it.
You can't buy it.
You can't merit it.
You can't make yourself worthy of it.
God must save you or you can't be saved.
God must do it or it will not be done.
And God does these things.
By grace through faith as a gift he saves.
And so then what's the place of good works?
Does it matter if I do anything?
Does it matter how I live at all?
No, no, look at the language.
Verse 10, God saves us by grace through faith and for good works.
For we are his workmanship.
Created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand that we should walk in them.
So Paul is saying, you're not saved by your good works.
You're saved for good works.
As William Temple put it, the only thing of my very own which I contribute to my redemption is the sin from which I need to be redeemed.
And having been redeemed, the apostle says, we are what?
We are His workmanship.
In fact, that's the
the way the language reads, the pronoun his is first, his workmanship, we are.
To emphasize this, it's not by our works, his workmanship, we are.
And the word used is poem, it's the word from which we get the word poem.
You're the poem of God, the creation of God, the artistry of God, the workmanship of God.
You aren't your own creator and you aren't your own savior.
So we might say it this way.
When you find a turtle on the top of a fence post, you know it didn't get there by itself.
How did you get where you are?
Christian.
He worked.
Then we were.
We work it out.
We live it out.
We express it.
What kind of works is he talking about?
The good works, which God has pre-planned for us.
Did you see that?
What are those?
Well, he doesn't actually tell us here.
He doesn't spell it out to me.
Verse 11 doesn't tell you the good works that God is interested in seeing you do.
But it would be surprising if he didn't say anything about these good works over the course of the rest of the book.
In fact, chapters 4, 5, and 6 speak of them.
Chapter 4, verse 1, urges us to walk in a manner worthy of the calling to which we have been called.
Chapter 5, verse 1 and 2 says, therefore be imitators of God as beloved children and walk in love as Christ loved us.
And when he starts talking about walking in love, it's interesting how much he simply turns to our various relationships.
I mean, how do you live in the church together with people?
You may have nothing else in common with but Christ.
And you may not even like them, or they may not like you.
Or how do you get along in a marriage that's old and stale?
Or how do parents and children get along with one another when we're tempted to be at each other's throats?
Or how do we relate to unbelievers?
Or how do we deal with spiritual warfare against spiritual entities?
How do we do any of this?
We walk.
Walk, he says, as dearly loved children because Christ loved you.
Walk in love towards others because you're His artwork and He's making you perfectly like Himself.
That perfection to be found, of course, ultimately.
in glory.
But notice then, as we close, how all of this is very humbling.
We didn't save ourselves.
We're saved by His grace, not by our own works.
Even faith is a gift.
And these good works we walk in, He says, God prepared them beforehand.
He planned them.
And then He gave us life and empowers us to do them.
So this isn't, I walked on the moon kind of stuff.
The fans of the comedy bit by Brian Regan will know that he tells it better than the non-comedian before you.
But he says, would you imagine for a moment being at a dinner party where someone is there called the Me Monster?
Someone who's always talking about me.
I did this.
I did that.
I own this.
I own that.
The Me Monster, me, me, me, me, me.
That's Brian Regan.
Regan imagines Neil Armstrong at that party.
Just eating his food, sipping his soup, biting his time while the me monster talks on and on.
And finally, Neil Armstrong looks up and says, oh yeah, I walked on the moon.
Conversation ended.
What could top that?
Well, Paul isn't telling you that you're alive in Christ, raised with Christ, seated with Christ in heavenly places, and therefore God's workmanship so that you can say, oh, yeah?
Look at me.
No, it's for by grace you have been saved through faith.
And this is not your own doing.
It's the gift of God, not as a result of work so that no one can boast.
Let me call you, dear Christian, to boast in the Lord.
Let's pray.
We do, we would give you all honor and praise and glory and freely acknowledge that we were helpless when you helped us.
It was worse than we knew that salvation is better than we could have ever guessed.
Grant us to know
How wide and long and deep and high is this love of Christ for us?
In Jesus' name we pray.
Amen.
Let's stand together and sing.